h1. The Git Textmate Bundle

h2. Installation

You can install this bundle in TextMate by opening the preferences and going to the bundles tab. After installation it will be automatically updated for you.

* Many shortcuts are available from the SCM shortcut ⌘Y  Subversion commands are ⌘⌥G.  Less frequent commands are accessed via the menu.

h2. Support

* "Issue tracker":https://github.com/textmate/git.tmbundle/issues
* "Repository":https://github.com/textmate/git.tmbundle

The "Mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/git-tmbundle has now been closed. Please feel free to report issues using the "Issue tracker":https://github.com/textmate/git.tmbundle/issues.

h2. Theme notes:

The "Git Commit Message" Language defines two scopes that can be used by a theme to generate "line too long" warnings for the first line of the commit:

* invalid.deprecated.line-too-long.git-commit
* invalid.illegal.line-too-long.git-commit

The warning scope triggers when the first line exceeds 50 characters; the error scope over 65 characters. These aren't generally-used TextMate scopes, so you can add new rules to your preferred themes, such as orange background/red background. You can also edit the regex to change the preferred character counts.

h2. Development

h3. Running Specs

The specs must be run with Ruby 1.8.7 (p358). Use your Ruby version manager of choice to install this version. Then, with this version activated (and @Support/@ as current directory), run @bundle install@ to install the appropriate versions of RSpec and hpricot.

When running the specs from the command line you need to set @TM_SPPORT_PATH@ explicitly. The following should work:

    export TM_SUPPORT_PATH=~/Library/Application\ Support/TextMate/Managed/Bundles/Bundle\ Support.tmbundle/Support/shared

To run the specs then use:

    bundle exec spec spec/

h2. Who:

h3. Previous Maintainers

* January 2010 - 2012: "James Conroy-Finn":http://jamesconroyfinn.com/
* January 2008 - December 2009: "Tim Harper":http://tim.theenchanter.com/ (with "Lead Media Partners":http://leadmediapartners.com).

h2. Git-tmbundle superstars

The Git TextMate Bundle wouldn't be possible without the contributions of the following fine gentlemen:

h3. Major Contributions

* <b>Allan Odgaard</b> - Started the bundle, got it rolling. Many patches. Oh, and TextMate :-).
* <b>Sam Granieri</b> - GitK, Many of the git-svn commands, Git initialize repository command, menu layouting, create-tag.
* <b>Johan S&oslash;rensen</b> - Contributing the CSS styling.

Please feel free to send a pull request if you've added any functionality to this bundle that you think the rest of the git-loving, TextMate-using world would appreciate!
